Hymn of 150 Verses
----------
Introduction
In whom at all times and in all ways all faults are absent and in whom all virtues in every manner are established, in him it is proper for them that have understanding to take refuge, to praise him, to serve him, and to stand fast in his teaching.
(See previous verse)
In him, the only Protector, those faults along with their Impressions are wholly absent and in him, the All-Knower, all those virtues are present, invariable.
For even a spiteful man does not with justice find any failing in the Blessed One whether in thought, word, or deed.
I, having gained human estate to which belongs the great joy of the Good Law, even as a turtle's neck might chance to thrust through a yoke hole in the mighty ocean, how shall I not extract worth from this voice of mine, pervaded as it is with impermanence and beset by dangers arising from the imperfections of karma.
(See previous verse)
Thus minded, although knowing that the Sage's virtues range beyond calculation, yet I devote myself to a portion thereof from regard to my own welfare.
Hail to you, the Self-born, whose works are many and wonderful, whose virtues are too numerous and potent to be defined!
Their number? It is infinite. Their nature? What words for it? But they bring merit, and therefore I have much to say concerning your virtues.
----------
Praise of Causes
Having shaken off the doubt 'can it be done or not?', of your own accord you took this helpless world under your protection.
Uncommissioned you were kind, you were fond without a reason, a friend to strangers, a kinsman where there was no family tie (?).
You gave even your own flesh. What need to speak of other things? Even with your life-breath, O Kindly One, you gratified the suppliant.
A hundred times you ransomed with your body and life the bodies and lives of living creatures in the grip of their would-be slayers.
Not from fear of the Evil Way nor seeking after the Desirable Way but from mere purity of heart you made righteousness your habit.
By ever spurning the crooked, by ever adhering to the straight, you became the single repository of pure actions.
Tormented often, in the nobility of your heart you displayed your fiery power against impurities but took pity on the impure.
Not such could be the delight of living creatures in recovering life lost as was yours when you gave up life for others' sake.
That pity, Lord, which, regardless of pain though cut in pieces, you often showed even to murderous beings, that seed of full enlightenment, your jewel of mind, only you know its essence, O Brave One! The rest are far therefrom.
(See previous verse)
The place hard of attainment is not won without deeds hard of performance; thus thinking, you fostered Energy without regard for self.
The loftiness of your excellences was never lowered; hence in you the rising scale of excellences was abolished.
There was no attachment even to very pleasant and fruitful meditations for you who were ever constrained by the great pity in your heart.
That pleasure which, though excellent, is not shared with others hurts rather than helps such as you, O Righteous One!
From the mingled you took the essence; good speech, free of impurity, you drank entire; evil speech you shunned like poison.
Purchasing good words even with your life, O Knower of the worth of jewels, you were zealous for enlightenment in birth after birth.
Thus, striving so through three incalculable periods of time, partnered only by your resolution, you gained the supreme place.
----------
Praise of Incomparability
Envying not the distinguished, despising not the lowly, competing not with equals you attained pre-eminence in the world.
Your devotion was to the causes of virtue, not to their results. Therefore, by means of your perfect way of conduct the virtues attained in you their culmination.
You raised yourself to such a height by good actions that even the dust of your feet became a receptable of merit.
Your faults were diminished and extirpated, your virtues enlarged and purified; by this wise conduct you reached supreme attainment.
You struck at faults with all your might so that not even their Impressions remained in your soul-series.
Virtues you continually accumulated in yourself so that not even a likeness thereof is found in any other.
Every wordly material for comparison is subject to injury and obscuration, limited in time and place, attained very easily.
What likeness indeed could there be to your virtues, unrivalled, unapproachable, lasting, turning not aside, unsurpassed?
The depth of the salt ocean becomes shallow as a puddle when the unfathomable, boundless depth of your wisdom is beheld.
The firm weight of the earth becomes light as the tip of a śirīṣa filament when compared with your firmness which nothing in nature can shake.
Before the light of your knowledge, O Sage, which destroys the darkness of ignorance, the sun does not even attain the level of a firefly.
The purity of moon, sky, and water in autumn become as if sullied when set against the purity of your words, mind, and actions.
In naming these I have named every worldly good; for the paltry elements of the world are far removed from the elements of the Buddha.
Only to that jewel of the Law, by the gain of which you gained preeminence, do you bear resemblance, O Kindly One, and only it resembles you.
But where something with a hint of similarity is adduced by way of comparison with you, being merely the delusion of a man's own wish, that is great wantonness on the part of the speaker.
----------
Praise of Wonders
Considering the true nature of things I look upon your victory over Māra as but a trivial matter, though all the world is amazed thereby.
For they who rise up to assault, though their fury be great, are not too heavy a load for Patience to bear, especially when in a worthy vessel.
But your vast slaughter of impurities, accomplished that same night after the conquest of Māra, that is indeed most wonderful.
He who is amazed at the dissipation of darkness by him whose garland is a thousand rays might wonder, O Hero, at your victory over the tīrthikas.
Three have ever been conquered by three: the passionate by the passionless, the wrathful by the victor over wrath, the foolish by the free from folly.
You praise good elements, you blame bad elements; but towards good beings and bad you have neither liking nor disliking.
What praise could be found for you in whose mind was no movement of revulsion or inclination towards Arhat or tīrthika?
In you was no attachment even to virtues, no desire even towards the virtuous; ah! the supreme purity of your most tranquil being!
Because of the ever-unaltering calm of your senses your ever-tranquil mind is seen as though plain to the eye.
Even to the foolish are the purities of your thought and memory well known, being made plain by the good words and good actions which revealed your nature.
----------
Praise of Form
This form of yours, calm yet lovely, brilliant yet not dazzling, modest yet mighty, whom would it not entrance?
That form of yours pleases the eye of him who has seen it a hundred times and of him who views it for the first time, both alike.
Because it never satiates the beholder and because of its mild aspect your body gives fresh delight as often as it is seen.
Your figure has the qualities proper to a receptable, your virtues those proper to an occupant; by reason whereof both are endowed with the highest excellence and the excellence of each is adapted to that of the other.
Where else would these virtues of a Tathāgata be well housed but in this form of yours, blazing with signs and marks?
Your form seems to say to the indwelling virtues 'I am fortunate'; and the virtues seem to answer it 'we are well placed'.
----------
Praise of Pity
All this world without distinction was bound by the Impurities; you, that you might free the world from the Impurities, were long in bondage to Pity.
Which shall I first extol, you or the Great Pity by which you were held so long in the saṃsāra, though knowing its evils so well?
Used though you were to the delight of loneliness, your time was passed among the crowd; this was brought about by your Pity, given free course.
As a nāga is drawn from his lake by a spell, so are you drawn by Pity from the peaceful wilderness to the village boundary for the sake of those to be trained.
Though dwelling in deepest tranquillity you were caused by your devotion to Pity to set foot in the arts of a singer.
The magic, the Lion's Roars, the displays of your own qualities, these were the whetstone-rubbings from Pity's gold in you who had spewed out the activity of desire.
Ever beneficent on behalf of others while cruel to her own master, to you alone, O Lord, was Pity pitiless.
For so it was that resolute Pity did sometimes cut you into a hundred pieces and cast you like an offering to the quarters in order to accomplish others' welfare.
But clearly Pity is virtuous and acts in accordance with your will; for although thus injuring you she does not offend you.
----------
Praise of Speech
Well worded yet of great significance, true yet sweet, their meaning profound or plain or both together, condensed or copious as they are, who after hearing such utterances of yours would not be convinced, though he were your adversary, that you knew all things?
(See previous verse)
Generally your speech was wholly sweet; when necessary it was somewhat otherwise; but every word of yours was well said because it achieved its purpose.
Every saying of yours, whether smooth or harsh or possessed of both those qualities, takes on, when pounded down (in the mind), a single flavour.
Ah! the surpassing skill of your most pure actions by which this vessel of word-jewels was made after such a fashion!
For from this mouth of yours, pleasing to the eye, this your most ear-entrancing speech drops like nectar flowing from the moon.
Your speech is as a rain cloud laying the dust of passion, as a garuḍa exterminating the snake of hatred.
It is like the sun again and again thrusting aside the darkness of ignorance, like Śakra's weapon splitting the mountains of pride.
Free of falsehood because based on knowledge, free of confusion because of the absence of impurity, easily understood because rightly applied, your speech is trebly excellent.
Just at first your words ravish the hearers' minds; then, being pondered, remove their passions and ignorance.
Your words are adapted to all, cheering the afflicted, striking terror into the heedless, alarming the lovers of pleasure.
These words of yours are for all; they please the wise, strenghten the intelligence of the middle sort, and dispel the darkness of the slow-witted.
Your sayings draw men away from false opinions, draw them to nirvāṇa, draw out their faults, rain down virtues.
Your intelligence is in all things unhampered, your mindfulness is in all things present; therefore no prophecy of yours in any matter fails of result.
Because you make no move at the wrong time or in the wrong place or towards the wrong person, therefore your words, like energy rightly applied, are not in vain.
----------
Praise of Teaching
Your teaching, and yours alone, is the only path, pleasant in method, goodly in result, free from moral fault, fair in beginning, middle, and end.
If fools, through attachment to false opinions, contemn your teaching which is so wholly beautiful, then there is no enemy like false opinion.
Remembering the affliction which you bore for the sake of this world it would be right to follow your teaching even if it were ugly.
All the more since you are beneficent in deed and word should your teaching in all ways be fulfilled, even by one whose head is aflame.
Independence, the joy of enlightenment, praise of virtue from you, peace - all these four good things are gained from your teaching.
This teaching of yours, O Hero, brought terror to all tīrthikas, agony to Namuci, cheer to gods and men.
Even the ordinance of the Lord of Death, which rules widely over the three worlds without let or control, has been overcome by your teaching.
For he who knows the rule of your teaching might if he desired live even for an age; but of his own free will he goes forth to the place where Death cannot tread.
Nowhere except in your teaching is there the threefold division of time into hearing the Scriptures, thought upon their meaning, and the practice of meditation.
That men do not reverence this teaching of yours so full of good, O Bull among Sages, what is more calamitous than this?
----------
Praise of the Vow
To hear you brings satisfaction, to see you brings tranquillity, your speech refreshes, your teaching liberates.
Your birth rejoices the people, your growth delights them, your activity benefits, your ceasing destroys.
The celebration of you takes sin away, the remembrance brings happiness, the seeking gives understanding, the full knowledge purifies.
In approaching you is fortune, in honouring you exceeding wisdom, in worshipping you freedom from fear, in serving you prosperity.
You are a great lake of merit, pure through perfect conduct, calm through perfect meditation, unshakable through perfect wisdom.
Your form is a jewel to see, your fair speech a jewel to hear, your Law a jewel to ponder; for you are a mine bearing jewels of merit.
You are the island of those swept along by the waves, the defence of the stricken in spirit, the refuge of them who fear existence, the resource of them who desire release.
To all living things you are a good vessel because of your pure conduct, a good field by reason of the excellence of your fruit, a good friend because of the benefits you confer.
You are dear for your beneficence, charming for your tenderness, altogether beloved for your gentleness, honoured for all virtues.
You are charming because blameless, lovely for excellence of speech and form, wealth-bringing from the accomplishment of every aim, propitious because the receptable of virtues.
----------
Praise of Guidance
You admonish the stubborn, you bridle the headstrong, you set straight the crooked, you urge on the slow-placed, the tamed you put under the yoke, to the vicious you are forbearing; therefore you are a driver unsurpassed of men as of unbroken horses.
(See previous verse)
In you there is pity for the afflicted, good will toward the happy, compassion for those in calamity, benevolence to all.
Affection even to the hostile, well-doing even to the fallen, tenderness even to the fierce - wonderful is this nobility of yours.
If father and mother are acknowledged to be venerable because they are benefactors, what dignity should then be yours whose beneficence has no limit?
You became as a wall to those standing at the edge of the precipice who, careless of their own good, are, as it were, their own enemies.
To aid the two worlds and to help pass beyond the world you set the light of wisdom among a people in darkness.
The activities of gods and men, divided when directed towards sensual pleasures, attained unity in you, being at one in enjoyment of the Law.
For you have granted this hospitality of the Law unstintingly to all, O Blessed One, without distinction of birth, age, caste, place, or time.
As if amazed and envious the gods honour with the añjali salute even your disciples in whom is neither amazement nor envy.
Ah! how brilliant is the arising of a Buddha, cream of the saṃsāra, by whom humanity became envied of the gods!
----------
Praise of Arduous Deeds
Fatigue, loss of the pleasure of tranquillity, contact with evil-doers, the Pairs, the press of the multitude - since, bearing these ills as if they were virtues, you strive for the world's sake with mind free from attachment, how wonderful is the blessed Buddha-nature of the Buddhas!
(See previous verse)
You ate even sorry food, accepted hunger sometimes, trod rough paths, slept on mud trampled by cattle.
Out of love for those to be trained, O Lord, you undertook service attended by insult and changed your dress and speech, master though you were.
Although you are master, O Lord, you are never found to be so in your own case; for you are employed as an underling by all at will for their own advantage.
No matter by whom or where or how provoked you do not transgress your fair path of conduct.
Men study not so the welfare even of one who seeks their good as you study that even of one who seeks your harm.
Towards an enemy intent on ill you are a friend intent on good; even in a constant fault-seeker you are bent on searching for virtues.
To him whose invitation to you was with poison and fire your coming was with pity and nectar.
You overcame the revilers by patience, the malicious by blessing, by truth the slanderers, by kindness the injurious.
The manifold natures of men, depraved from time without beginning, were converted instantly by you, their evil destinies being annulled.
----------
Praise of Skill
That the harsh became gentle, the niggard bountiful, the cruel tenderhearted - this was the result of your skill in expedients.
Tranquillity of the senses in a Nanda, humility on a Mānastabdha, mercy in an Aṅgulīmāla - whom would not these amaze?
Leaving a golden couch, many lay happily on beds of grass, steadfast, satisfied with the elixir of your Law.
Sometimes you spoke not even when questioned; sometimes you yourself accosted others and made converse; in another case you aroused desire and spoke (later): for you knew times and hearts.
Having first produced mental health by precepts of charity and so forth you then applied the Law like dye on a clean garment.
There is no expedient or possibility by which you did not try to rescue the miserable world from the dreadful hell of the saṃsāra.
Many and diverse were the words and actions to which you resorted in one place or another according to the differing minds of those to be trained;
All pure, amiable, honoured and extolled, salutary and acclaimed by gods and men.
It is impossible both to speak and to act much and well; but in your case, O Truth-teller, both were found possible.
By your own purity alone you might cleanse the world; therefore there is not to be found in the three worlds a field such as you; especially since you so rose up for the welfare of all beings, utterly lost as they were in the perilous strait of existence without beginning.
(See previous verse)
----------
Praise of Freedom from Debt
I know not the way by which recompense might be made to you; even those who have attained parinirvāṇa are not free of debt to you.
Although these stand in your Law, it is their own welfare that they work; but your toil for their sake - how should there be any requital thereof?
For looking upon the hearts of the sleepers you awaken them, the kind and heedful friend of heedless beings.
The destruction of sins was declared, the delusion of Māra was laid open, the evil nature of the saṃsāra was told, the region free from fear was shown.
What else could one anxious for the good of living creatures and pitying them find to do in which you have not led the way?
If these qualities were transferable you would assuredly have bestowed them upon all, even upon Devadatta.
That is why, O Protector of the world, you told the world this truth 'Here one governs not another' as if expounding grammar.
Having for a long time promoted the Good Law on earth out of pity for the world, having raised up many worthy disciples able to help the three worlds, and having trained your personal converts ending with Subhadra, what yet remains to you of your debt to living creatures?
(See previous verse)
Powdering your bones into tiny particles with the diamond of samādhi, you did not even at the end give up your habit of performing most arduous works.
'My Body of Law and my Body of Form both exist for others' sake.' Thus even in nirvāṇa you taught this unbelieving world.
For thus, having transferred your Body of Law in its entirety to the virtuous and having split your Body of Form into tiny fragments, you attained parinirvāṇa.
What steadfastness! What conduct! What form! What virtues! There is nothing in the properties of the Buddha which is not wonderful.
Even to you, beneficent, beautiful, tranquil in speech and action, are men hostile. Behold the fierceness of stupidity!
Those beings who honour you, the ocean of merit, the treasure store of jewels, the heap of properties, the mine of virtues, even upon them is homage well bestowed.
Your virtues are unfailing, O Lord, but my capacity may fail; therefore I stop short for fear of halting, not because I am satisfied.
Only you yourself can know yourself who are beyond measure, beyond number, beyond thought, beyond comparison.
Not even a part of a fraction of your virtues has been celebrated and yet there is great gladness in my heart; without diminishing the waters of a mighty lake the thirsts of men are appeased.
By the fruit arising from this good work of mine which is the product of a wit derived from faith in the Sage, may the mind of all living things, now tossed about on the wild winds of evil thoughts, be brought to docility.
----------
----------